## Agenda

### Wednesday 13th  November
|TOPIC|PRESENTER
|-----|------|
|1. VTL 2.1 markup documentation: review of the current version, status-of-art of G4 grammar and planning for the final version by end of 2024|Attilio	
|2.	Proposals for organizing training sessions and webinars|All
|3.	Analysis and prioritization of the proposals for VTL 2.2 (or 3.0):|All
|- a.	Relaxing of some constraints (e.g. widening of numeric data types for arithmetical/statistical operators)|Angelo
|- b.	Reshaping of the user manual (template: Pandas documentation)|Javier
|- c.	Standard for APIs|Valentino
|- d.	Review of the Information Model: relaxing the relation between Represented Variable and Value Domain|Antonio
|- e.	Viral attributes (with sepcial attention to confidentiality and status)|All	
|- f. Simplifying validations and output of the results|Antonio 	
|- g. Resolving pending issues|All
|4.	Review of the current VTL internal organization: from Work Streams to Work Packages (like TWG)|Angelo
|5.	Next physical meeting (Q1 2025)|Angelo
|6.	AOB|All


## Participants

1.  Angelo Linardi
2.  Antonio Olleros
3.  Attilio Mattiocco
4.  Bryan	Marquette
5.  Daniel Suranyi
6.  Dario Camol
7.  Frederik Van Hecke
8.  Franck Cotton
9.  Hadrien	Kohl
10.  Javier Heranandez
11.  Jesús	Simón
12.  Juan Lopez
13.  Katrin	Heinze
14.  Laura	Vignola
15.  Nicolas Laval
16.  Noah	Boerger
17.  Romain	Tailhurat
18.  Sergey	Grebenshchikov
19.  Stefano Pambianco
20.  Valentino Pinna

### 1. VTL 2.1 markup documentation
The review of the documentation, together with the test of the new G4 grammar by the engines' implementing groups have to be closed by mid December, in order to have enough time to publish the the final version of the manuals, the grammar and the Technical Note document by the end of the current year; the SDMX official pages with the link to the VTL GitHub folder will be updated and a message to SDMX User forum will be sent. From 2025 the markdup folder will contain the official documentation for VTL and will evolve according to the current GitHub rule (changes will be accepted only by pull requests and will be committed after 1 review).

**Actions**:
- Attilio and Valentino will coordinate the test activities and authorise the commit of the final VTL 2.1 version in GitHub

### 2.	Proposals for organizing training sessions and webinars
During the VTL session of the last SDMX Expert Meeting in Amsterdam, VTL TF has been asked to make VTL more "visible" and "understandable" by the statistical community. Angelo asked all participants to share the training documentation that is available in order to create a VTL training site where publications, presentations, videos could be published. Some suggestions have been made in order to create a "Getting started" section and a "Playground site" to allow VTL "beginners" to familiarize with the language.

**Actions**:
- All to send VTL training material to Angelo 

### 3.	Analysis and prioritization of the proposals for VTL 2.2 (or 3.0)
For all proposed topics that need further analysis, bilateral meetings with the proposing VTL TF members will be scheduled; then a prioritisation exercise will be done in order to discuss them during next physical meeting. 

**Actions**
- Angelo to organise bilateral meetings for topics b, c, d, f
- All to work on pending issues (point g)

### 4 .Review of the current VTL internal organization: from Work Streams to Work Packages (like TWG)
VTL TF is now organised in 3 Work Streams to finalise the activities for VTL 2.1. 
For the coming years, probably a more efficient organisation could be put in place, in order to continue working on the evolution of the language but also on other specific topics with a given time frame and deriverables. Recently SDMX Technical Working Group has been reorganised: three TF chaired by a TWG member are responsible for general parts of SDMX  (Information Model, Formats and REST API) and work packages are dynamically created with specific goals (e.g. SDMX and DDI interoperability). Probably, given the fact the VTL "core" part is well established and consolidated, a similar organisation could be defined for VTL: some "fixed" structures to continue working on "core aspects" (e.g. language and documentation evolution, training) and "dynamic" structures (or "project teams") could be defined to deal with specific needs that could arise.

**Actions**
- Angelo to send a proposal of a new working organisation for VTL TF 

### 5.	Next physical meeting (Q1 2025)
ECB has been asked to host next physical meeting in Q1 2025. Katrin accepted to organise it in Frankfurt in the first half of March. All the details will be shared in the first months of 2025.

### AOB
The next SDMX TWG meeting will be in Salamanca in June 2025; half a day will be reserved for VTL TF meeting.

